Hey there, welcome to the Posit Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Herron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12 p.m. U.S. Eastern Time.
If you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. I am so excited to introduce our featured leader today, Cara
Thompson, Data Visualization Consultant at Building Stories with Data. Cara, welcome.
How are you doing? Thank you so much. Thank you so much for having me. I would love you
to introduce yourself, tell us who you are, what you do, and something that you do for
fun. Okay, so I am Cara Thompson. I live in Edinburgh in Scotland, and I am a Data Visualization
Consultant. So it's my joy in life to help data teams make the most of Data Viz to communicate
the outcomes of their research really effectively. And I think I found over the years that my
niche has seemed to define itself as helping teams of specialists communicate with a non-specialist
audience. And it's just, yeah, it's great. I enjoy doing that a lot. You can probably guess
some of the things that I do for fun from the stuff that's behind me. I'm a musician. Mike and
I have talked about this a few times, and I'm convinced that my musical education plays a
strong part in how I approach data visualization. Is that, would you say your main for fun activity
is music, or is there anything else that you really like to do outside of data stuff?
I run as well. I enjoy running. I find it's a great, yeah, it's a good headspace generator.
I'm a mum of two young girls, and so having, you know, half an hour to an hour where nobody
is asking me for anything is really wonderful. That's awesome. Well, we at The Hangout here,
Rachel just ran the Boston Marathon. I would just like to put that out there, but that's amazing.
I'm incredibly impressed. I saw a picture of her at mile 25, which is almost the end of marathons,
like 26.2 miles, right? And she was still smiling. I would have been deflated and a puddle on the
floor. So you're not alone. The DSH Run Club is definitely a thing. I would love to put forth a
few topics for everybody that I think would be amazing to talk with Cara about. So I will ask
for a couple of these, but I really encourage everyone to think along these lines. So things
that Cara brings to mind for me, striking out on your own and being a small business owner.
That is a really hard topic. When is it time to do that? How do you know you want to do that?
How hard is it? What does that entail? Also working out loud. Cara is amazing at working out loud,
and it's something that I feel really passionately about, and I've talked with her about it. I know
that she has amazing things to say about it, but also being interdisciplinary. And this is
where I would like to start with you, Cara. I remember asking you, do you have any sort of
data viz books to recommend? And you said, no, I don't. I don't worry about data viz specific
stuff. I don't worry about data viz specific books or data viz specific conferences because
I am interdisciplinary and that's what makes me special. So can you talk a little bit more about
that? Yeah, sure. I mean, I have to say I do have a lot of respect for people who write data viz
books, and I think there is a lot to be learned from them. But I think a huge part of what
makes me approach data viz the way I do is the background that I have. So I grew up in a family
where we were speaking two languages. So I speak French and English. I speak French with my
daughters. And so there's an element of learning that people process the world in slightly different
ways through different languages, which I think has been useful to me. I enjoy playing music. I
enjoy writing music. If anyone in my group of friends is getting married or having a big party
and they've got some musical friends, I'll try and write parts for everyone so that it all works
well together. And so that is part of it. Mum is a brilliant artist. She paints. And so she used
to take us around art galleries growing up. And there's a lot to be said for just being curious
about how other people use shapes, colour, movement, and how across all these things we
encode information, whether it's language, music, visual arts. We're all encoding it and then
decoding it. And it's just something that I have always found fascinating. And so I took the
multidisciplinary thing through to my degree. I did a degree which was a joint degree in music and
psychology, which I really enjoyed because when I got bored of writing my psychology essays, I would
write a piece of music and then I would get stuck on that and I would go back to writing the
essay and back and forth, which was great. It also taught me a lot about managing multiple deadlines,
which I didn't always succeed at doing as a student. But it was fun. And so I think I did
that as an undergrad. Then I did psycholinguistics for my masters and then in the PhD revisited how
the brain reacts to strange things in music and language, how we process patterns, what we can
learn from that as to how we're wired to be excited by new stuff. And yeah, I just love
hanging out with people who are interested in different things to me because I think we've
always got a lot to learn from each other. That's wonderful. I think that you dropped a few fun
facts on us and I will drop a fun fact. I see them in the chat, too. I love everybody's fun
facts. I'm reading them. My fun fact is probably that I am an anthropology
nerd and an archaeology nerd. I am obsessed with it. If you find me outside of work times,
I'm probably reading or watching something historical, especially like historical sewing
is very, very exciting to me. And I wanted to sort of stay on this topic a little bit because
you mentioned to me museum displays that you really like the way that you see things done.
And you also said, like, how do comic books do this? How do we present things visually?
Can you talk a little bit about some of your favorite inspirations that are comic books?
Yeah, of course. I mean, so comic books are a really big thing in France and, you know,
they are throughout the world, but French kids will tend to grow up reading Asterix at some point
and Tintin. You know, there's a lot to be learned from Tintin. It's actually historically
quite useful. There's some stuff that you have to, you know, reimagine a little bit nowadays. But
I think, you know, growing up with that notion of telling stories through pictures has been quite
fun. So how do you know, you know, if there's a speech bubble on its own in a little box,
how do you know who that belongs to? How do you infer what has happened between image one and
image two? How is movement communicated? How do you see the different angles that people are
looking at? And then it's really fun seeing different cultures. So like Japanese comics would
be quite different from European comics in terms of how shapes and movements and stuff are
translated. And there's quite a lot of similarity between the two, but also really interesting
differences to look at. And then you've got the thing about, you know, the more specific a
person's face is, the less likely you are to identify with them. So if you make a more generic
face, people are more likely to identify with the character. And if you think about, you know, the
IKEA flat pack furniture instructions, very generic people that are drawn in there. And I guess
that's another interdisciplinary thing, you know, growing up building flat pack furniture. That was
me and dad. That's what we did together. Dad's the musician in the family. But, you know, growing up
with him, both of us used to like, really like that problem solving. Like we had, where did this
piece go? How did they, why did they draw it this way around? And I think for a while as a kid, I
thought maybe, you know, drawing IKEA instructions books could be, you know, one of my future jobs.
It's just been really interesting thinking about that notion of translating something complex into
something easy has been a thread all the way through. I love that you just said that because
I, no joke, considered at one point in my life, maybe I could be the person who designs LEGO
instructions because I find fault with them often. I'm like, why did they do it like this?
It should be positioned a different direction. It should be this way. And they should make that a
different color. And my eyes can't tell the difference between those, which I would love to
meet somebody who does that one day or someone who designs museum displays. Well, I'd love to ask you
a little bit about your background because you mentioned your master's and your PhD, love that
that was super interdisciplinary. What did you do after the PhD that got you to where you are right now?
Yeah, so after the PhD, so my PhD was in how the brain reacts to weird things in music and language.
There wasn't a huge amount of funding for pursuing that at postdoc level and then going into academia,
although that had been my intention. So I applied for a bunch of postdocs and didn't
really get anywhere with that. But where I did end up was teaching research methods to
students who were enrolled on a psychology module within a music department.
And so that was really fun because these were people who hadn't come from a research background
at all, but they were doing music psychology stuff. If you think about music therapy or the
potential community involvements in music programs, they wanted to do some research that could
help to emphasize the impact of what they were doing. And so my task was to give them what they
needed to do that, to do it well, to write it up. And that was really fun. So I did that for
for an academic year. And during that time, a job came up at the Royal College of Surgeons in
Edinburgh. So in order to be a surgeon in the UK, you have to pass one of the Royal College of
Surgeons exams in order to become a consultant. And so these exams are really, really important.
They're career defining for people. If you can't get through that way, there are
alternative routes, but they're less straightforward. And so the exams are really
important. They're really high stakes. And it's really important to get it right. And an exam,
like a research design study, is a measurement tool. So the task was figure out how precise
the measurement tool is, figure out how we could make it more precise, help the surgeons understand
the imprecision, the implications of that. And what do we do with candidates who achieve exactly
the pass mark? Are they having a good day and actually they're not really safe to be let loose
on people? Or are they really competent and they're having a bad day? And these were all
things that required the surgeons to grasp statistical concepts in terms of the relationship
between the items in the exam, probabilities, false positives, all this kind of stuff.
And surgeons are not used to not understanding stuff because they've always been top of the
class. It's something that they found quite disconcerting. And so I think what I really
enjoyed with them was meeting them with explanations that they could really grasp
really well enough to make informed decisions. And data visualization became a key component of that.
So rather than bamboozling them with statistical concepts, I would show them the data and we could
see, right, here's the pattern. This is what it looks like. These are the implications. What do we
want to do about it? And so it was just really, really interesting to be in that world of,
you know, communicating education data to specialists in a completely different field
and helping them feel confident that they were making sensible decisions for the exam.
So I did that for about a decade and during that time got more and more excited about data
visualization. And then I went on maternity leave with my first daughter and discovered the tidy
Tuesday challenge. It was COVID. I needed something to keep my brain going with the
coding side of things. And my maternity leave got extended because of the lockdowns. So I thought,
right, I'll get involved in this. This looks like fun. And it was great. And it really, you know,
it really transformed things for me. And that's where the learning out loud in R came from,
although I think I've always been keen on learning out loud. But doing it in the R community,
people were so welcoming. It was a real confidence boost at a time when I desperately needed it.
And so I'm just so grateful that that challenge was there at a time when I needed it. And I'm
grateful that it's still there, that it continues. And it's a source of inspiration for so many.
So yeah, seeing what other people were doing, like, how nice did they do that? And then you
find the code, you're like, okay, okay, that makes sense. I can, I can, I can do something.
And so then you build on it and figure out how it works and build your own stuff that people go,
how did she do that? And then you go, well, here you go. Here's the code. And seeing other people
building on the stuff that I've done is just really, really rewarding. It's a magical feeling.
I want to shout out tidy Tuesday. If you don't know what tidy Tuesday is, there are no rules
around tidy Tuesday. This isn't something where it's like, you need to know how to participate.
Tidy Tuesday is a repository that contains hundreds of data sets that are real world.
They're interesting. They are topical. And they are just CSV files. You don't have to access them
in any specific way. You can just access them as a CSV file, save them, call them, reading them in
in whatever language you like. And we all get together each week with this new data set that
the data science learning community curates. And we work on it out loud, right? Like whatever that
means to you, share it on social media, maybe share a screenshot of what you're doing. If it's
data viz, that's an easy thing to share. But I really recommend that whatever language you use,
Python, R, Julia, Excel, do whatever you can get involved in the community and share.
All righty. I would love to hop to Slido and get some questions going. Mike, you asked a question
that everybody likes. You got lots of upvotes, and I like it too. Would you like to ask that?
Sure. So the question goes something like, can you talk a little bit about the differences between
the kind of infographics that you might see in the media, like BBC website or Financial Pounds,
and the kind of what I'm calling death by data viz that we get in pharma industry or for
publications or for the kind of regulated industries? Because it seems that there's very
little in common. I mean, I would love for some of those publication visualizations to be closer to
your best practices and those kinds of more easy to read, easy to understand concepts.
But can you just kind of, why would people do those kind of really nasty data visualizations?
And what can we stop doing? Yeah. I think there's an element of you do what you know,
right? So if your field has always produced this specific type of visualization using this tool
that everybody uses, then you just go with it. If the aim is to communicate just within your field,
then that's going to be the path of least resistance, A, in terms of time investment,
B, in terms of getting other people who are familiar with that to understand it. But I think
there is a real case to be made that people, I think probably since the pandemic and more data
was being shared during that time publicly, people have got more used to seeing visualizations,
people are more willing to engage with them outside of the specialist fields. And so if we
want that to be done well, then we maybe do need to start engaging a little bit more with formats
that have been more successful in more mainstream media. I think there's, yeah, it's probably a
question of priorities as well. You know, I feel I had to fight quite hard against imposter syndrome
when I would go to conferences and see all these people doing really cool stuff with the data,
and I was like, I just make it look pretty. But actually making it look pretty, it's not just
about making it pretty, is it? It's about making it more functional, making it more accessible,
making it easy for people to understand. So yeah, I think it's probably priorities, it's time,
and it's that people see it and think, oh gosh, I don't have the skill to do that, whereas in actual
fact, you know, people can build up the skills to do these kind of things. So yeah, I'm with you,
Mike, in terms of wanting to make academic publications have higher quality visual. Well,
I'm not even going to say high quality, actually, because I think people do put a huge amount of
effort into the visualizations that go into academic publications, and it's more, you know,
trying to encourage people to think about the impact of how they style things on the audience's
reception of the message. Does that answer your question?
He might not be able to unmute, but I'm going to say yes, thank you.
Okay, I'll take that, that's good.
I might not be able to, like, quick draw on you, Mike. Thank you, Mike, for that.
Sorry, I think that is right. There's an element of I don't have time, but then other people may
not. You're essentially wasting other people's time if you're obfuscating what's in your plot.
Also, like, good and effective is so subjective, and all of our eyes work differently, and all of
our brains work differently, and I think that's a really interesting challenge to navigate.
Alrighty, I would love to have Inga ask their question. I will highlight it here.
Let me see if I can find you to unmute you.
I just did.
Yay, awesome.
Hi, everyone. Thank you, Kara, for being here. My question is kind of coming from a place where I
feel overwhelmed often by sort of the number of data tools and packages available for any
given task or project, so I'm wondering if you have thoughts on, like, how do you decide what to
use and for what purpose, and then how do you balance between sort of deepening a focused
skill set versus expanding your toolkit by learning new things, new packages and tools?
Yeah, that's a great question. The overwhelm is real, I think, for everyone, so don't feel bad
about that. That's probably a good thing, you know, to realize in a sense how small we are in
a huge field. You know, it's good. It keeps us wanting to learn. I would say the thing that I
encourage people to do when I'm giving data viz workshops is start from where you are, so
think about the types of data that you are currently interacting with, and think about the
types of stories that you're telling with the data that you're interacting with, and focus on a small
number of graphs that you think are a really good fit for that combination of things, so the
interaction between the type of data and the type of story. I always encourage people to start
with pen and paper rather than starting with tools, so if you were to draw your data story on the back
of a napkin to explain it to a friend of yours over coffee, what would that look like? And then
from there, figure out what tools can get you close to that. There are some great resources
out there. There's the data visualization catalog, which is tool agnostic, so there are a whole
lot of different data viz types on there. What I love about the catalog is that
for each data visualization type, there are caveats, like you might want to use a pie chart, but here
are the reasons why this might not be the best plan for your data, and the same with all
sorts of graph types. I picked on the pie chart because everyone loves to pick on the pie chart.
They do have their place, but yeah, it's really useful for having that
conversation with people about why different types of graphs might be suited to different
data sets or different stories. A lot of the time it's linked to tutorials
with different tools. If you're looking specifically for coding stuff, then data to
viz, I think Jan Holtz developed that, is a really good tool where you'll find tutorials for doing
all that. But I would say start where you are, start with pen and paper, and get really good
at a small number of things. Then the skills that you've learnt on those small number of
things will be transferable to different visualization types, and then you can grow
from there. But yeah, don't worry. There's always going to be stuff that we don't know. I feel the
same. I had a client the other day ask for a specific type of plot, and I was like, oh, I
might just have to Google that very quickly to figure out what it is. So yeah, it's perfectly
normal. Thank you. I'd also love to shout out, as long as we're talking about tools, I too am a big
pencil and paper first person. If I'm figuring something out, I have whole notebooks filled with
things where I'm figuring out plots. But I also wanted to shout out Kinga Strzaska-Hill.
Kinga, if I'm saying your name wrong, I'm so sorry. I put her LinkedIn profile in the chat.
She's the first person who posted something, a visualization, where I was like, oh, that's really
cool. How did they do that? And I asked her, and she's like, oh, I just added that in Canva. And I
was like, oh, my gosh, I can add things to plots in Canva? This hadn't entered my mind, right? I
had not thought about this. I think about everything with plotting being parameterized,
and that's not reality. It doesn't have to always be that way. If something is really, really
difficult to add in that way, and this is a one-off visualization, why not pop it in Canva
and very quickly add what you need to add to it? It was sort of mind expanding for me
to treat it more like an art project, right, than just something that I have in my coding language
or my visualization program. Okay. So we have so many questions in Slido. Thank you, everyone,
for asking such amazing questions. And Cecilia, I would love you to unmute and ask yours if you're
available. I think this is Cecilia Baldoni. Hi. Yes. Hey. I don't have my Slido in front of me,
so I don't remember how you phrased it. I'm going to put it in the chat here for you.
Ah, thank you. Yes. I think in general, I might have understood it wrong, but my understanding
is that you focus mostly, if not exclusively, on data visualization. And I wondered if you ever
find it limiting or there's many different projects that keep it fresh, let's say. And then
I was just curious what you would say to somebody who would like to specialize so much.
And if that's not the case, tell me, because maybe I understood it wrong. Thank you.
That's great. No, that is absolutely the case. I do specialize in data visualization. And to me,
this has been something that I wrestled with when I first started out as a consultant, because you
can code. So I can do this. I can do this. I can do this. I could build these kind of pipelines.
I could do this kind of stuff. And so the question, I think, to ask yourself if you're thinking of
doing this kind of stuff is, what is the thing that I do slightly differently? So what is the
thing where I could really hone a craft and be world class at this particular skill?
There is a temptation to try and be all things to all people and be as helpful as you can.
And initially, you think, if I diversify what I do, then I can get more clients because I can do
all sorts of different things. Whereas the natural fact, if you do one thing really, really well,
then you gain a reputation for being very good at that thing. And the more you do it, the better
you get at it. And the more you can talk about projects that you've done that are similar,
the more you attract the same kind of clients. So there's a lot to be said for niching,
for thinking quite carefully about the skills that you want to be showcasing.
And yeah, I guess when you're starting out, you probably want to push a bunch of different doors
and see which one's open easier than others. But for me, it's definitely been data visualization.
And I like the fact that I get to interact with a lot of different people.
So I'm doing some stuff at the moment for the British Heart Foundation,
and it's been really interesting interacting with their team and seeing how they're using data.
And I did some stuff for a mental health advocacy charity in Scotland, which was really great,
just seeing the data that they'd collected and how they were using that to try and inform
policy decisions. I've done some stuff for research groups who were comparing how trustworthy
videos are perceived to be, depending on whether they were AI generated or human generated.
I've done stuff equipping research teams to go and build their own visualizations,
which I really enjoy as well. So I think there's always enough to keep me excited
about what can be done with data viz. And it's the combination of, you know, I'll do it for you,
and I get to learn something about what you're doing. And that's really exciting. Or I build
tools or training kits for you. And then you get to go and build more stuff than I could ever dream
of building. And that's a really exciting thought as well. So I think, yeah, to answer your question,
I don't think it gets stale. I don't think I'm going to run out of projects because
this is just a really interesting skill to be adding in to what teams are already doing.
And I also love that I don't have to be the expert on the subject matter. So I get to trust
their expertise. I have enough statistics in my background that I can spot something that's not
maybe the way that it should be. But I love the fact that I get to make other people look good.
And there are plenty of people out there to help with that. So yeah, it's good fun.
Well, there are a couple of questions in Slido that are really along this vein. So I would love
to slip those in here too. Jared asked one. Another one is anonymous. So I will ask both of
them. Jared, I see you have an asterisk there. I'm going to ask yours for you. Jared says,
with regards to being a consultant, how do you find clients? Or do clients find you as a result
of what we have continued to call working out loud? And then the anonymous question was,
how did you find your niche? So maybe these two can go together.
Yeah, that sounds good. So I think finding my niche, it was a process. But it was actually
quite a fun one. And part of it is when people come to you and go, I really like what you've
done here. Could you do it for us? And that kind of makes you see, OK, this is a useful skill
that people are excited in, in which I stood out. Part of it was asking clients directly why they
approached me. And that helped me refine the language that I use to talk about what I do,
which was a really interesting one as well. The whole thing of having the scientific rigor,
but also the creative side and marrying those two things was something that came back a few times in
what clients were telling me when I asked them that question. In terms of finding clients,
a lot of it is about learning, working out loud and becoming recognized within my group of peers
as somebody who knows what they're doing, who's also flexible in the way that they approach things.
And so initially, a lot of my work came from people like yourselves. We would hang out online.
We would do Tidy Tuesday stuff. And then we'd go, I really want to bring that to my team,
but I don't quite have the skill set that's needed to do this bit of it. Could you help us with that?
And that was really great. A lot of it is word of mouth and recommendations from other people.
That's not a long term strategy for running a business. So you do have to be a little bit
proactive about publicizing what you do. But yeah, a lot of the time, if I'm honest,
clients do tend to find me rather than the other way around. But I'm probably
more aware now of the potential in what I share online for it to be reached by different audiences.
So my peers who get some useful skills from it and also potential clients who see it and go,
actually, we could do with that as well. Does that answer the question?
I think it does. Jared has given me the thumbs up. And I want to continue on this topic for just a
second, because something you said that really stuck with me, really resonated with me and I
agree with, is when you are working out loud, you're sharing your stuff, you're posting on
LinkedIn, whatever that is, don't try to be the expert. It's a lot of pressure to be the expert,
but it's also sort of gives people nothing to grab on to. Whenever somebody is just like,
I'm the expert and here's how you do it. There's not a conversation that's being invited there.
And I really love the way that Cara interacts online, because it's more like,
here's this thing I've learned. I didn't know this yesterday, and I know this today,
and I want to share it. Or, hey, I'm trying to do this, and I'm having a hard time with it.
What does everybody think? So I wanted to just shout out that you do that super well,
and I admire it. And I really recommend that sort of approach to anybody who's
trying to sort of be more active in the community online, but is worried that they
don't know how to do things. Cara, you say, don't worry about that, right?
Yeah, no, don't worry about it. Go for it. I think it's funny, because I thought this was
going to come up because we talked about it briefly, but I was just thinking about it earlier
today. So I don't have a LinkedIn post schedule. I don't have a list of topics that I'm going to
talk about. I don't do any analytics on what time of day I'm posting, and the impact that that has
on my reach, and all that kind of stuff. I'm not trying to game the algorithm. It genuinely is,
oh, wow, this thing. I didn't know this thing. Part of it is I'm talking about it so that other
people can learn about it. Part of it is that then I can add it to my blog so that the next time I
get to this thing that I don't know how to do, I can find the solution that I found two years ago.
But it genuinely is coming from a place of, wow, I'm excited about this thing that I didn't know
about. Or like yesterday, I spent a day in frustration trying to hunt down this bug. I've
just switched from Windows to Mac, and that's been a whole journey in and of itself, but it's been
quite fun. And there was an error message that was coming up, and I was getting stuck on it.
And so all the way through, I was like, once I find this, I'm going to tell people what the
solution is. And then no one else will have to fight with this thing in the way that I just did.
So, yeah, I would say if you don't be, particularly in our communities, I think
there is a genuine desire to be helpful to each other. And so coming in with a question that's
a genuine question, not one of those, like, oh, if you ask me a question, then you cannot get
access to my newsletter kind of question. That's not a question. But a question where you genuinely
want to learn something from the community, then ask it. And that will create interactions.
It will open up conversations. You will be more integrated in people's networks,
and you'll understand things better. So, yeah, do stuff, make mistakes online. I've made
mistakes online. And actually, sometimes you learn a lot from those as well. You post this
thing like, oh, this is great. And someone goes, actually, that's not how it works. OK.
And then you learn from that. So, yeah. And also how humanizing it makes you more human.
No, I thought it's that's the thing. It's humanizing. It's whenever I see somebody who's
like, oh, oops. Oh, well, right. I'm like, yeah, that's amazing. I think that everybody that I
talked to about Tidy Tuesday goes, oh, but I can't do it as well as XYZ person can. I'm not
Nicola Rennie. I can't do it as well. And Nicola Rennie, if you ask her, she'll say,
all my visualizations all the way back to the beginning of when I started Tidy Tuesday are
all out there. You can go see how they weren't amazing in the beginning. It didn't stop her
from doing it. That's the point. And if you follow me, you'll see me post questions about
Python that I don't understand and all kinds of things where I'm like, why can't I make a new
folder in BS code without making it inside of another folder that I don't want it to be in?
There are all kinds of things that you could talk about that everybody else will find infinitely
relatable. I wanted to shout a couple of things out here. We have 20 minutes left. Somehow 40
minutes have gone by. There are a few things in the chat that I want to highlight. One is that I
posted that Cecilia, who just asked that question, has the most amazing Quarto scrolling website
about Shrews. I've mentioned it before. I'm just such a fan and I'm going to gush about it.
It is very visual, so it's very on topic. You'll see I posted also that she's doing a thing about
scrollytelling with Our Ladies Amsterdam, which is run by Kylie, who is usually here. I don't know
if I see Kylie today, but go sign up for that. Go look at the website. It's amazing. And then also,
we have Crystal Lewis in the chat today. I see her chatting. Another person who is fantastic
at working out loud, at sharing things. And I think all three of us, Crystal, Cara, and I
have the same philosophy around social media, which is if something tickles your brain,
go post about it. There doesn't have to be a schedule or anything. And I have Crystal's
book right here, and I'm so excited. She just sent this to me. Everybody go check out Data Management
in Large-Scale Education Research. You don't have to be in large-scale education research to
super benefit from data management topics. Okay. Enough selling for me. I have a question from
Joey, Joey Marshall, that I would love him to ask out loud. So let's ask Joey to unmute,
and I'm going to share his question in the chat as well.
Cool. Thanks. Hey, Cara. Thanks for hanging out with us. I'm wondering if there are trends in
data viz right now that you feel really excited about or that you think is really cool, or also
trends in data viz that you dislike. I'll just give one example of something I've seen a lot
lately, which is there's a lot of generative data visualization out there that basically
uses LLMs to you ask a question of your data, and it magics up a data visualization. And I
don't know whether to be suspicious of that. I mean, it feels kind of sketchy. But yeah,
what are trends that you feel are exciting and maybe some things that you dislike and feel are
bad? Yeah, good question. I think one of the things that I'm finding quite exciting is just
people coming up with new ideas and trying to see how we can help people connect to the stories
behind the data. So I think as we've got more and more used to seeing graphs, people are getting
more and more used to that. And seeing large-scale data, I'm quite excited by the small-scale data
stuff, and people using data to emphasize personal stories. I think Georgia Luppi has got
a brilliant manifesto. I think it's Data Humanism Manifesto, where she talks about
trying to help people connect to the reality behind the numbers and how we do that well.
So that's probably the opposite end of the spectrum from let's throw all the data in the
world at this thing and see what comes out the other end. But I think to me that's really
important, and it kind of ties in nicely with the way that I tend to think about the people
that are behind the data stories that we tell. In terms of stuff I'm less excited about, yeah, I have
to say the AI hype is something that causes me to ruthlessly unfollow people on LinkedIn,
because it just clogs up the feed with all these recycled things. And some of
it is great, I think there are some really exciting tools out there that can help people
generate new ideas, but I would say don't delegate your specialism. So I feel like,
so I play multiple musical instruments, I play the electric guitar very badly, and I deliberately
bought it a couple of years ago to teach myself to fail hilariously at stuff, because normally
musical instruments, I'm quite good at just picking them up and going and see where we land,
and if you land on the wrong fret on a guitar when you're trying to do this cool riff it's
it's hilarious and also painful to the ears. But I feel like, you know, learning to use a
new tool can sometimes feel like learning to use a new musical instrument. If you know what you're
aiming for, so you know what you want it to sound like, you know what you want it to look like in
the end, then you can pick up the tool much more easily. And I think that, you know, to me the
strength in AI and in using that is to help us get to where we want to get to, rather
than replacing the creative process. I'm probably slightly biased coming from a family of creatives,
but seeing the damage that's being done there as well is not something that I'm excited
about. So yeah, I think there's lots to be said for new tools, for using AI to explore them,
but also for remembering the people behind the data, and also remembering the, you know,
the ecological impact of all the queries that are running, which is not not negligible as well.
Awesome, thank you. Thanks Joey for the question. Alrighty, I have an anonymous question here, which
goes all the way back to the beginning, to ask about why the data science transition. And I want
to say that we've covered this anonymous question asker. I just want to make sure, like that you
said that you don't have a lot of like straight data science in your background, which there hasn't
been straight data science as far as a discipline for a really long time. But when you were
actually doing the transition, my question is, were you even thinking about it as data science?
Or was this just Kara following her heart and doing visualization, because that's what she
found interesting? Yeah, no, I wasn't thinking about it as data science. So my background's
in psychology. I grew up on SPSS in psychology, if people can remember that. I'm 41, and so at
the time when I was studying, data science wasn't really a thing, or it was a very new thing,
or it was a very niche thing. And data visualization as a field wasn't really a thing either.
And it's been interesting seeing a few other people similar age to me, similar specialism to
me, talking about this, and about how the different things that are in their backgrounds led
them to where they are now. I got into coding because I was interested in seeing how
much we could automate all the pointing and clicking that we were doing in SPSS. So I joined
the Royal College of Surgeons. The task was to analyze exams. And if you're doing all that
in SPSS, you're doing the same thing time and time again. You can write SPSS syntax, if anyone's given
that a go, welcome to the club. But in terms of producing reports, producing really
good visualizations, being flexible when a new question came in, that was a lot more difficult
to do. So I thought, oh, there's this thing called R, I should give that a go. So I taught myself R
to try and automate the reports, ended up doing that quite well, which meant that we
could then process a lot more exams than we had done previously. And then, you know,
caught the bug. I was like, oh, what else can we get it to do? But it was very much thinking of it as a tool
to do the job of helping people understand the statistics, rather than thinking about it as,
you know, exploring the tool for the sake of the tool itself. And I think that's probably
where I am in terms of my understanding of what I do. I wrestled with what I should call
myself for a long time. You know, when you fill in these official forms and they're like, well, you
know, what is your job title? Like, data viz consultant doesn't fit anywhere. So am I a data
scientist? Well, maybe, but, you know, only tangentially. So yeah, I think the transition
from academia into data science was more of following a topic that I was interested in,
following a task that I was interested in, and then finding the tools that happened to be data
science tools to continue to do that well. Awesome. Thank you. I love the SPSS conversation
that's going on in the chat right now. A bunch of us going, yep, SPSS is actually still alive and
well. I learned that a lot of my professors were educational psychology professors. And so that's
what they taught in their applied statistics courses. I actually really kind of miss SPSS
sometimes. It's just the point and click that I don't love. You're right. Doing things over and
over again, you're like, this could be easier. And especially when you get to the end of something in
SPSS and you realize you have to go back and do it differently. You're like, oh no, I have to go
back to the start of the yellow brick road. And I have to re-click all of those things in the same
order, but with one step slightly different. That is the magic of parameterized and coding and
scripting. So thank you so much for that question. And I will mark that one as answered. Sonya has
a question here. Sonya, are you available to unmute and ask? I am. With AI just becoming
such a big topic these days, I want to know what parts of your job you see being automated by AI?
And if AI has right now or even if you see it in the future impacting your business,
and if so, in what ways? Yeah, good question. And the honest answer is I haven't actually
explored AI all that much. And so I've used it for write me a step-by-step instruction for how
to do this thing on this device that I don't know. I've used it for get me the right regex string
that I need. Although there is something so satisfying about getting that right yourself
from the get-go. It's one of those, oh, did I do it? Yes, it worked. So I haven't really,
I don't really use it at all regularly. Just every now and then for troubleshooting,
but then it doesn't always get to the right answer anyway. I think sometimes there is a
tendency to think that AI can do everybody else's job, but not your own. So I've seen a lot of
people talking about how it can be useful for cleaning up data. I've worked with Crystal. I've
loved working with Crystal. And I know that I would trust Crystal way more than I would trust
an algorithm to do that kind of stuff right. So I think there are specialisms that we don't
always appreciate in other people's work that we think can be delegated, which I think is a bit of
a dangerous way to be thinking. To me, there's stuff about checking the accessibility of color
palettes, for example. There are a few AI tools that are coming up in that field that are really
quite exciting, or you can say tweak this and bring this in, and that's good. But then you still
have to test it. You still have to check that it's doing the right thing. You have to check that it's
not compromised on the creative vision that the client had. So I think using it for get me from
this place to the next step is something that I can see it doing really well. I think there are
people who are throwing all sorts of stuff at it and coming up with all sorts of stuff at the other
end, which there's room for it to grow. It's still fairly new in terms of its impact. I think
maybe in terms of business day-to-day running, there's maybe a little bit more
where it could be useful than necessarily in the super specialized skills.
Where I really do not like it being used is people who use it to churn out a whole bunch of content
online and just, oh, do we need that? Does the world need that? Does the planet need us to use
its resources in that way? I'm not convinced. Does it add anything? I don't know. But, yeah,
I think using it wisely, no problem at all, but being aware of the need for specialists
still would, I think, keep us on the right track. Absolutely. And I think that this
leads us right into our next question, which is an anonymous one on Slido.
What are some common pitfalls in DataVis and how can you avoid them?
Yeah, I mean, there are pitfalls. There are so many of them. One of the pitfalls is to just do
what you've always done and stay comfortable within that. I think that comes back to Mike's
question earlier. Sometimes it's best to ask for forgiveness than ask for permission when it comes
to trying out new ideas in DataVis. I think a common one is to just throw too much information
at people and to have it all be at the same kind of level of perceived hierarchy. So if you're
putting a lot of text into a visualization, people are going to spend a lot of time reading that.
If you pare it back a little bit, that's helpful. If you organize it visually, so you add some text
hierarchy into it, making sure that people process it in an order that's logical, then that will help
as well. Often as data people, we come at things with like, oh, look at all this data, look at all
these patterns, how can I show them all? When in actual fact, the question is, what do my users need?
What is the first thing that should stand out from the visualization and what could I put
behind the curtain, either with some interactivity or with extra graphs in it? I think that to me
is a big pitfall that I see a lot. It's that desire to show everything that you've done
in a graph, which isn't super helpful for the people. Yes, I love that answer so much because
it sort of feels like giving a presentation where you're like, I want them to see how much work I
did. So I am going to put in all of this stuff, right? And in reality, you did your job and what
they need to know is just like one-tenth of what you want to throw at them. I will also say,
this is a pitfall of giving a workshop. I have attended, I'm going to say, over 50 data workshops
in the past, I don't know, four years. And the best workshops are ones where they're led by
someone like Nicola Reni, who will stick to one thing and teach you that one thing.
And they're not trying to throw a billion different things in there and they're not going, oh, just,
you know, go complete all of these different empty or half-empty scripts with all of the things that
you just learned because no one's going to retain 50 concepts in the 10 minutes that you gave them.
So yes, for sure. I think that there are some amazing questions left in our Slido,
but we have six minutes left. So let's get one more in here.
And I really think that this one is really cool, but I wonder if it's too long.
It was down here from Nessa, and Nessa, I am going to ask it really quickly so that we can
squeeze it in. It's, have you ever had to convince people to care about data visualization?
Yes, yes, I think, yes, I do. I tend to speak at conferences which aren't data-vis focused
because the people who go to the data-vis focused conferences already care about visualization,
and it's the people who go to the other conferences that sometimes I feel I need to speak to more.
So yes, there is definitely the group of people who say, well, this is just making it pretty.
I don't need that. Or do we even need it at all? One of the things that I do at the start
of a workshop that I give regularly is set up this really silly scenario about needing to go
to the palmer penguins' islands and needing to see two different species of penguins, but I am
terrified of penguins with long beaks. That's the kind of premise of it. Help me plan my trip.
And then I give them the standard academic write-up of how many penguins are on each island
and what the mean beak length is on each island, all that kind of stuff. And that's not super
helpful. Then we move to a table, which isn't very helpful. Then we move to a table that's
been stylized, which is a little bit more helpful. Then we move to an ugly graph of all the data,
and then we move to a graph where I've spent some time organizing it visually so that it makes
sense, and suddenly the story stands out. And I think a lot of the time we think it's a lot of
extra effort for us to do it, but the effort that's reduced from the users is really worth it.
So I think sometimes, yeah, if people are looking to argue that DataVis isn't worth the time,
then spending a little bit of time and then showing them the impact that it can have is a
better way to do it than just going through conversationally.
Wonderful. Thank you so much for the amazing question, Nessa. We have just a few minutes
left and I would love to end with sharing your LinkedIn. I'm going to share that in the chat
right now, and asking you if you have any parting words of career advice for us.
Good question. I think earn a reputation for being a good person to work with,
and that is a holistic good. Okay, so you can be super skilled at this thing,
but put people off with your approach, or you can be slightly less skilled and bring people in
and encourage them and be a good team player. And I know which of those two I would prefer to work
with. So I think that to me is a big piece of career advice. Get good at your skill,
focus in on something that you think you could be world-class at, hone that craft, but don't
neglect relationships, they are so important. Yeah, be a good community member with your skill.
I love that so much. I will echo all of that. I would also say, like, think about what makes
somebody great to be around, and ask yourself if you are putting that energy out into the world as
well. For example, I have a friend named Joanna, who always, when she is presented with a challenge
to something that she believes or that she just stated, she will go, huh, that's fair. Like,
she doesn't fight it, she doesn't say, no, I'm right, and you're wrong, and here's why.
She's so receptive to just being like, oh, yeah, I hadn't thought about that. And I realized through
knowing my friend Joanna, that I really, really value that, and that that's so welcoming and
wonderful in other people, in friends, and coworkers, and bosses, and managers, whatever.
Somebody who is willing to just be like, oh, I was wrong, or, oh, I didn't realize that, or,
oh, I just learned something new. That's just such an impressive and wonderful quality
that I admire in everybody. It's why I admire you, Kara, because all of your posts
exude that energy. All right, everybody, thank you so much, Kara. This was amazing.
Thanks for having me. It's been really fun.
Good, good, good. I'm nervous every day before these. I'm sure you were nervous, too.
And I get to the end of them, and I go, why was I nervous? This was fantastic.
We have such a wonderful Data Science Hangout community. We are going to leave the chat open
for just a minute. I see people asking for your LinkedIn, so I am going to add that again.
Everybody, if you would like to save the chat, there are three dots in the top right-hand
corner, probably, sometimes Zoom move things, where you can click those three dots and then
save the chat. I recommend that you do that now, because there were tons of resources shared,
but you can always find these recordings on the chat. So, if you would like to do that now,
you can always find these recordings later on YouTube. They get up in one or two weeks,
and then resources are shared as links in the description there.
Thanks so much, everybody. I'll hang out for just a second more so people can say goodbye
and save that chat. And I'll say, see you later. Next week, we have Sajay Suresh,
Senior Director of Data and Applied Science at Microsoft. So, it's going to be really,
is such a fun person to talk to. And I look forward to seeing you next week.
Bye, everybody. Bye, everybody. Nice to see you.